In this section, we are discussing a very basic question.
That is the difference between function scope and block scope.
The category is the JavaScript language, and there are three related questions which can be asked with
this topic.
So before we start discussing the difference between function and block school, we must understand
what is the scope of a variable.
Now the scope can be off variable and function.
So the logic remains.
See?
When I say scope of a variable, that means it is a lifetime or availability of a variable.
For example, if you declare a variable in one function, then it won't be available in the other function.
Let's try with an example.
I'm going to define a function here and declaring a variable in it.
Now I have another function, function B and I'm trying to display the value of X.
Let's try to call both and B.
Here.
When we run the code, it is giving an error that X is not defined, that is X is not available because
variable x is declared in function E and I'm trying to access I'll refer to it in function B.
This means the scope off of variable X is limited to function e in other words, variable x is local
to function a scope of a variable can be local or global.
At the moment, variable x is local to function e let's make the variable x global global variable will
be accessible for all functions.
And to make a variable global, we declare it outside all the functions.
This variable I'm going to declare above function a.
Now I'm changing the value.
I'm adding file to variable X in function E and then I'm referring value of X in function B.
Let's run the code.
So now the output is 15.
Both function E and B are referring to the same variable.
So X is global and available to the entire piece of code.
Now coming to the discussion of difference between function school and block school years five has function
scope and that is because of hoisting.
But S6 does not have hoisting.
Remember, if you are declaring a variable with var keyword, then hoisting will be there.
Let's try to understand that term hoisting and block scope.
Separately, we will begin with hoisting.
Let's see, we have a variable called variable X.
Now, if I tried to display this variable before it is declared, let me first of all try some other
variable which is not existing anywhere in the code.
If I run this.
It says that Y is not defined.
That is a problem because why is not existing?
Now on this line one.
What if I see x?
This also doesn't exist on this line.
But still, if I run this code instead of giving any error, it says it is undefined.
Let me also try to assign a value to variable x and I run it again.
Then also it is undefined.
The reason is that internally the JavaScript compiler finds all the variable declarations which are
declared with the var keyword and it brings all the declarations.
Remember only the declaration and not the assignments.
So internally, what happens internally?
It actually says var x like this and internally it will be something like this.
So naturally it has to show undefined at this point.
Remember, I am showing you in this code window, but this actually happens internally behind the scene,
so you do not see it.
Earlier, when JavaScript was introduced, there was no specific way of writing the language.
It was not very rigid about rules of declaring variables at that time.
The compiler used to search through entire function and it used to bring all the declarations on top.
That means if you have declared, let's say var X somewhere in the function here and you have ten lines
after that you have one more var x just in case.
Right?
Even though there is a curly bracket that is there is a block, right?
Let's say you have a far loop.
Imagine that you have a far loop and that you have declared variable x once again.
What will happen?
The feature of hoisting will search through entire code.
In the function for that function only remember.
Only for one function.
For each function.
It will search through all the variables.
Right?
And it will bring it on top.
So what happens here?
X x x also comes on top.
So at a time in EA's file, that is with var keyword, you can declare only one variable in a function.
This is what hoisting is.
Hoisting means it is bringing the declaration on top, not the assignment.
So if you have var x is equal to nine, nine remains that only.
So this is about variable hoisting, right?
Now let's talk about block scope.
BLOCK scope is introduced from year six onwards and we are using the left keyword there.
So, for example, I have to declare, let's say let X is equal to nine.
Now again, I am having a block, a block which is just a curly bracket.
You may have an F condition, you may have a for loop.
Doesn't matter.
Even just like this, curly brackets, that's also a block.
Now I declare let x the same name I am using and seeing that let's say eight.
So now there are two different values.
Also, let me also refer the values.
I'll say console.log x, right.
So we have the same name in the same scope, in the same function.
And if I run this, this is running absolutely fine because the let keyword doesn't do hoisting the
JavaScript compiler doesn't hoist variables declared with the lat keyword.
Right.
So we do not use var keyword anymore.
But still, if you are using var keyword, hoisting will happen.
Right.
So here we have variable x declared in the same school, but it is working fine because it's not going
to be hoisted on top.
The way we tried with hoisting, let's say I display the value of X and then I declare x, right?
If I do this, see what happens.
It is it cannot access x before initialization.
Now it is not showing undefined.
So hoisting is not happening here.
So now you know what is block scope and what is variable hoisting odd you can see function scope because
when hoisting is there, you have a function scope that is one variable for each function.
You cannot have another variable with same name in years five or with var keyword.
Let's discuss about related questions of this topic.
Question one There can be a question that what is hoisting.
We have already discussed that it is about a process which is happening behind the scene.
We do not see that as a developer, as an end user, we do not see that internally.
It is bringing the declarations on top.
That's what hoisting is.
The second question is how does block scope work?
So we have already seen that a block scope is nothing but the brackets, any way you put it, whether
it is an if condition for loop dowell or even just curly brackets to put that is a block created and
that creates a separate world, separate scope for those declarations existing in that particular block.
The third question can be what is scope of a variable?
So scope is nothing but the availability or visibility or lifetime of a variable.
So this is all about variable scope, hoisting and block scope.